.. _maxwell1_fundamentals_index:

Maxwell I: Fundamentals
=======================

.. topic:: Purpose

    We provide the mathematical and physical framework  for equations,
    ultimately formulated by Maxwell, that form the basis for EM surveys.

Background about the individual laws, their discoverers, and associated
physical principles are first provided first in :ref:`formative_laws_index`.
The first order equations are then combined to generate the formative
:ref:`Maxwell Equations <maxwells_equations_index>` in the :ref:`frequency
<frequency_domain_equations>` and :ref:`time <time_domain_equations>` domains.
These equations can be solved once sources are specified and appropriate
boundary and interface conditions are provided. Much can be learned by solving
the equations in an :ref:`unbounded homogeneous earth
<maxwells_equations_in_homogeneous_media_index>`, with plane wave and dipolar
sources. We present these along with software apps that allow the user to
visualize the fields and fluxes and explore the relationships between physical
properties, sources and EM fields. These examples also allow us to introduce
concepts, terminology and background mathematics that are used throughout
EM.geosci. For the user who is already familiar with basics of EM, the
starting point might be the synopsis of the Maxwell’s equations presented in
the :ref:`Quick- Guide <quick_guide_maxwell>`. In general, physical properties
vary in 3D and sources have many geometries. Different approaches to
:ref:`solving Maxwell’s equations <solving_maxwells_equations>` may be
required and we outline some principles for helping the user decide which
route to take and how to proceed. The final section, :ref:`Looking for More
<fundamentals_looking_for_more>` presents detailed information and additional
topics of general relevance to EM.

**Contents**

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    formative_laws/index
    maxwells_equations/index
    quick_guide_maxwell
    solving_maxwells_equations/index
    looking_for_more

