.. _numeric_discretization:

Discretization
==============

.. todo:: Parse this material throughout the numeric section as applicable

**aka: A (very) brief introduction to solving Maxwell's equations on a computer**

Maxwell's equations can only be solved exactly for a few special cases where
the conductivity model (and possibly the source-receiver geometry) has some
special structure and symmetry. To model an arbitrary geophysical survey over
an earth with topography and arbitrary conductivity, approximate methods that
can be implemented in a computer are required. These methods are known as
discretizations of Maxwell's equations because they break the earth into a set
of discrete volumes, or cells, with the physical properties held constant in
each cell.

It is possible to construct a discretization based on either the integral or
differential form of Maxwell's equations in the time and frequency domains.
For simplicity, we will restrict this discussion to discretizations of the
differential form of Maxwell's equations in the frequency domain.

Discrete approximations of Maxwell's equations used in geophysical prospecting
fall into three general categories based on the complexity of earth model they
can represent. The simplest discretizations assume that conductivity varies
only with depth but not laterally. The subsurface can then be divided into a
set of flat layers, with physical properties constant in each layer.

One may model a much larger class of geoelectric structures by assuming that
conductivity may vary with depth and in one lateral direction. This is known
as 2D modelling and requires dividing a two-dimensional (2D) section of the
earth into a set of discrete polygons, usually rectangles or triangles. This
provides a compromise between the computational difficulty of full three-
dimensional (3D) modelling and the limitations of 1D modelling. Of course, to
model the most complex terrain and conductivity variation, 3D modelling is
required. In 3D modelling the earth is divided into a set of discrete volumes,
usually cuboids or tetrahedra, with physical properties constant in each cell.
These three types of earth models, with their increasing complexity, are
illustrated in figure 1.

.. figure:: ../../images/1-2-3.png

  Visualization of 1D, 2D, and 3D discretizations.

1D modelling methods write the electric and magnetic fields due to a source
above a layered earth in terms of `Hankel transform
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hankel_transform>`_ integrals that are
evaluated approximately. Two and three dimensional frequency domain
discretizations transform Maxwell's equations into a system of linear
algebraic equations for the electric field or magnetic flux density at
discrete points in space, at a single frequency. In all these methods there is
a tradeoff between solution accuracy and computational complexity. A finer
mesh will lead to a more accurate solution but also to a larger linear system
that must be solved to compute the fields or fluxes.

Now let us restrict our attention to three dimensions. There are several ways
to discretize Maxwell's equations in 3D, including finite difference, finite
element and finite volume approaches. Here we consider a mimetic finite volume
approach applied to a uniform grid. For a full description see chapters 3 and
4 of :cite:`haber2014`. Consider Faraday's law and the quasi-static Ampere's law in the
frequency domain

.. math::
  \boldsymbol{\nabla\times}\mathbf{E} = -i\omega\mathbf{B}
  :label: FaradayAnal

.. math::
  \boldsymbol{\nabla\times}\mu^{-1}\mathbf{B} - \sigma\mathbf{E} = \mathbf{J}_s,
  :label: AmpereAnal

where :math:`\mathbf{J}_s` is the source current density and currents flowing
in the ground are represented using Ohm's law,
:math:`\mathbf{J}_{\text{ground}} = \sigma\mathbf{E}`. Almost all
discretizations of Maxwell's equations used in geophysical prospecting apply
the quasi-static approximation, meaning that they ignore the electric
displacement term :math:`-i\omega\mathbf{D}` in :ref:`Ampere's law
<ampere_maxwell>`. In broad terms, ignoring displacement is justified when the
area of interest is smaller than the source wavelength. See :cite:`ward1988` for more
information.

We divide the earth into a grid of cubic cells. The edges of the grid are
aligned with the axes of a cartesian coordinate system, as shown in figure 12.
The x-directed component of the electric field is discretely represented by
it's values at the centre of cell edges that point in the x-direction. The y
and z components of the electric field are similarly represented at the
centres of the y and z-directed cell edges. In the parlance of partial
differential equations, we say that :math:`\mathbf{E}` is discretized on the
cell edges. The magnetic flux density :math:`\mathbf{b}` is discretized at the
centres of cell faces. When electrical potential is considered (in
electrostatic problems) it is discretized at cell corners, called the mesh
nodes.

.. figure:: ../../images/Yee-cube-w-b.png

  Cubic cell with :math:`\mathbf{E}` discretized onto cell edges,
  :math:`\mathbf{b}` onto cell faces, and physical properties onto cell
  centres. Electrical potential :math:`\phi` is discretized onto the mesh
  nodes.

By constructing discrete approximations to the differential operators in
equations :eq:`FaradayAnal` and :eq:`AmpereAnal`, we can construct a system of
equations to solve for the electric field at the cell edges and/or the
magnetic flux at cell faces. The discrete versions of equations are
:eq:`FaradayAnal` and :eq:`AmpereAnal`

.. math::
  \mathbf{C} \tilde{\mathbf{E}} -i\omega\tilde{\mathbf{B}} = 0
  :label: FarDiscrete

.. math::
  \mathbf{C}^T \mathbf{M}_{\mu^{-1}}^f \tilde{\mathbf{B}} - \mathbf{M}_{\sigma}^e\tilde{\mathbf{E}} = \tilde{\mathbf{s}},
  :label: AmpDiscrete

where:

 - :math:`\mathbf{C}` is the discrete curl operator (all discrete operators are sparse matrices)
 - :math:`\mathbf{M}_{\sigma}^e` contains information on the discrete conductivity
 - :math:`\mathbf{M}_{\mu}^f` contains information on the discrete magnetic permeability
 - :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{E}}` is a vector containing the approximate electric field at each cell edge
 - :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{B}}` is a vector containing the approximate magnetic flux at each cell face.
 - :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{s}}` is a vector containing an approximation of the source discretized onto the cell edges.

We can now combine equations :eq:`FarDiscrete` and :eq:`AmpDiscrete` and use
the methods of sparse linear algebra to solve a large system of equations to
determine :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{e}}` and :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{b}}`
simultaneously. We can also combine the two equations to form two smaller
systems of equations to solve for :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{e}}` and
:math:`\tilde{\mathbf{b}}` independently.

