.. _maxwell2_static_index:

Maxwell II: Static
==================

.. purpose::

    Provide background and physical understanding for steady state Maxwell
    equations as they apply to geoscience problems.

When electromagnetic fields no longer change with time then Maxwell's
equations are in a "steady state". Here we examine these equations and present
analytic and numerical results for the resultant fields for some common
sources in simple earth structures. Sources can be galvanic, where current is
injected into the earth, or magnetic, where the source field arises from
steady state currents flowing in circuit. The practical applications are wide
ranging. The most common is the DCR (DC resistivity) survey which is used
exploration, environmental and geotechnical studies. Examples of the use of
DCR for mineral exploration can be found in the :ref:`Mt. Isa Case History
<mt_isa_index>`. That case history also illustrates how IP (Induced
Polarization) can be analysed using steady state equations. Any current
flowing in the earth will generate magnetic fields which can be measured. This
is referred to as an :ref:`MMR (MagnetoMetric Resistivity)<fields_from_grounded_sources_mmr>`. Finally,
earth materials can have a magnetic permeability that is different from that
of free space. In the presence of an external field such material will become
magnetized and the fields can be measured and interpreted. This constitutes
the foundation of all magnetic field surveys which use the earth's magnetic
field (caused by "steady state" currents in the core). {example} It is also
observed in exploration studies using low frequency airborne EM surveys. In
such cases, eventhough the sources fieldis  time-varying, the EM induction
effects are negligible and the process can be considered as DC.

To illucidate the fundamental physics we focus on some simple models (whole
spaces, half spaces with and without topography) and examine fields, fluxes,
currents, build up of electric charges. A conductive and magnetic sphere,
buried in the wholespace or halfspace provides much insight that is useful for
steady state problems and also for later problems when induction is important.
Interactive notebooks and good visualization tools help consolidate this
insight.




**Contents**

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    governing_equations/index
    fields_from_grounded_sources_dcr/index
    fields_from_grounded_sources_mmr/index

