.. _barents_sea_properties:



.. |lo| unicode:: 0xF8
   :ltrim:
.. |o| unicode:: 0xF8
   :trim:
.. |ao| unicode:: 0xE5
   :trim:
.. |O| unicode:: U+03A9
   :rtrim:


Properties
==========

Detailed petrophysical evaluation and rock physics analysis was carried out
for the Wisting Central and Wisting Alternative wells. Lithology and fluid
sensitivity of the elastic attributes were addressed in the rock physics
analysis and the main results obtained are illustrated in
:numref:`fig_poisson_acoustic_impedance`. This figure shows a cross-plot of
the elastic attributes Poisson’s ratio versus acoustic impedance, color coded
by four different fluid substituted saturations: 100% water, 80% oil, 80% gas,
20% gas (fizz saturation). Also shown is the in-situ saturation for the St
|lo| Fm., which is a clean, blocky shallow-marine shoreface sandstone, as well
as for the underlying Nordmela Fm, which is a coarsening upwards shaly sand.


Two important observations can be extracted from these plots. The first is the
well-known inability of the seismic data alone to discriminate between
commercial and non-commercial gas saturation: The 20% and 80% gas cases plot
on top of each other, which is not the case for the combination of elastic and
electric attributes (see :numref:`fig_resistivity_acoustic_impedance`). The
second observation is the unexpected high Poisson’s ratio (or higher
:math:`Vp/Vs`) in the St |lo| Fm. compared to that observed in Nordmela Fm.
for the same fluid saturation. It is worthwhile mentioning that the same
observation was found in both the Wisting Central and Wisting Alternative
wells, which suggests this unusual response is not a measurement problem.
Moreover, the fact that the AVO inversion produced a Poisson’s ratio solution
that also honors these slightly unusual well log observations of Poisson’s
ratio for the St |lo| and Nordmela Fms.
(:numref:`fig_inversion_initial_pwave_poisson`) validates these measurements.


.. figure:: images/poisson_vs_acoustic_impedance.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 80%
    :name: fig_poisson_acoustic_impedance

    (a) For the St |lo| Fm., multi-well cross-plot of Poisson’s ratio versus
    acoustic impedance color coded by fluid saturation with background
    colored by volume of clay for the full well. (b) For the Nordmela Fm.,
    multi-well cross-plot of Poisson’s ratio versus acoustic impedance color
    coded by fluid saturation with background colored by volume of clay for
    the full well.


.. figure:: images/resistivity_vs_acoustic_impedance.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 80%
    :name: fig_resistivity_acoustic_impedance

    (a) For the St |lo| Fm., multi-well cross-plot of acoustic impedance
    versus resistivity color coded by fluid saturation with background
    colored by volume of clay for the full well. (b) For the Nordmela Fm.,
    multi-well cross-plot of acoustic impedance versus resistivity color
    coded by fluid saturation with background colored by volume of clay for
    the full well. The induction in situ resistivity in Central is clipped at
    1,000 :math:`\Omega m` in the St |lo| sands, for reference the
    laterolog shows a similar shape in this zone, but is clipped at 100,000
    :math:`\Omega m`.


There is significant variation between the resistivity measurements made with
different tools in the well.  In order to calibrate the saturation model we
have chosen to use the LWD P40H curve. This is from a phase shift induction
tool, logged while drilling (which has the added benefit of reducing the
impact of mud invasion). This tool has returned results that are closer in
amplitude to the CSEM derived resistivity values, when compared to the
wireline HRLT laterolog results (with resistivities in the tens of thousands
:math:`\Omega m`). With the chosen induction curve resistivity values in the
St |lo| Fm. at Wisting Central are in the 700-900 :math:`\Omega m` range. The
water saturation was calculated from this using the rock physics model
represented by the Simandoux equation (:cite:`Simandoux1963`), Eq.
:eq:`eq_Simandoux`, due to the overall simplicity of the model and increased
accuracy over Archie in shaly-sand systems. This gives predicted hydrocarbon
saturations in excess of 90%.


.. math::
	\frac{1}{R_t} = \frac{\phi_e^m \times Sw^n}{a \times Rw} + \frac{Vsh \times Sw}{Rsh}
    :label: eq_Simandoux


where :math:`R_t` is the horizontal resistivity, :math:`Sw` is the water
saturation, :math:`m` is the cementation exponent, :math:`n` is the saturation
exponent, :math:`a` is the tortuosity exponent, Rw is the water resistivity at
formation temperature, :math:`V \! sh` is the shale content, :math:`Rsh` is
the resistivity of the shale, and :math:`\phi_e` is the effective porosity
defined as:


.. math::
	\phi_e = \phi_T \times (1 - Vsh)
    :label: eq_Simandoux_phi


where :math:`\phi_T` is the total porosity. The parameters used in the
Simandoux equation were calibrated to the measured data and are summarized in
the following table.


+-----------+----------------------+
| Parameter | Value                |
+===========+======================+
| a         | 1                    |
+-----------+----------------------+
| m         | 1.8                  |
+-----------+----------------------+
| n         | 1.7                  |
+-----------+----------------------+
| Rsh       | 6 :math:`\Omega /m`  |
+-----------+----------------------+
| Rw        |0.18 :math:`\Omega /m`|
+-----------+----------------------+

Table 1. *Parameters used in the Simandoux equation.*




In the context of a CSEM analysis, the background resistivity and the contrast
between background and reservoir is also important to understand.
:numref:`fig_well_log_resistivity` a and :numref:`fig_well_log_resistivity` b
show the resistivity variation with saturation calculated at the Wisting
Central and Alternative wells using the Simandoux parameters from table 1. For
each case, the calibrated Simandoux equation is used to calculate the
resistivity at log scale for a range of values of :math:`Sw`
(:numref:`fig_well_log_resistivity` c). The log scale values are then up-
scaled using an arithmetic average to give the bulk vertical resistivity (as
would be measured by a CSEM survey) across the reservoir interval. The shaded
area corresponds to the region of the curve where the resistivity is equal to
or lower than the observed background vertical resistivity in the area (around
20-30 |O| m). Only when the reservoir resistivity lies outside the shaded
region is there a contrast between it and the background, allowing it to be
detected by a CSEM survey. :numref:`fig_well_log_resistivity` c shows that
this condition is met for values of :math:`Sw` less than 30%. This provides a
practical limit on the sensitivity to :math:`Sw`, i.e. values greater than
this will not be resolved.


.. figure:: images/well_log_resistivity.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: fig_well_log_resistivity

    (a) Well log suite from the Wisting Alternative well, showing porosity,
    lithology, :math:`Sw` and resistivity. (b) Well log suite from the
    Wisting Central well, showing porosity, lithology, :math:`Sw` and
    resistivity. (c) The variation of resistivity with water saturation
    calculated from the Wisting Central and Alternative wells using the
    Simandoux equation. The shaded region shows the area in which the
    resistivity of the reservoir is less than the resistivity of the
    background structure, and will not be detected by a CSEM survey. Water
    saturations less than about 30% are required for the reservoir to be
    detected.

