.. _synthesis_FDEMandTDEMresponse:

Synthesis: Harmonic and Transient responses
===========================================

.. purpose::

    Provide integrated understanding of harmonic and transient EM responses
    using the simple circuit model.

.. plot::

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import matplotlib
    matplotlib.rcParams['font.size'] = 12
    tau = [1e-1, 1e-1/5, 1e-1/10]
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 3))
    ax1 = plt.subplot(121)
    ax2 = plt.subplot(122)
    axs = [ax1, ax2]

    t = np.linspace(-0.2, 1, 300)
    current_TD = np.ones_like(t)
    current_TD[t>0.] = 0.
    omega = 5*np.pi*2
    current_FD = np.cos(t*omega)

    ax1.plot(t, current_FD, "k",lw=3)
    ax2.plot(t, current_TD, "k", lw=3)

    for ax in axs:
        ax.grid(True)
        ax.set_xlabel("Time (s)")
        ax.set_ylabel("Current (A)")
    ax1.set_ylim(-1.2, 1.2)
    ax2.set_ylim(-.2, 1.2)

    ax1.set_title("Sinusoidal current (5Hz)")
    ax2.set_title("Step-off current")
    plt.tight_layout()
    plt.show()

Harmonic and transient responses are respectively oscillating and decaying in
time, and they are due to sinusoidal and step (either on or off) current. If
we have full band of frequency or time, then we can obtain one from the other.
However, in practice our measured band is limited hence each response can
sense different information of the earth. Often, harmonic one is called
frequency domain EM and transient one is called time domain EM.

An important feature in the harmonic case was the normalization of secondary
EMF with the primary EMF, and this is same has the ratio between secondary and
primary magnetic field. In contrast, for the transient response, this
normalization was not available because the primary EMF is zero when
:math:`t>0`, and this feature emphasized the importance of **scale** in
transient response.

From the asymptotic behavior of the response function in frequency domain we
defined **Resistive** and **Inductive** limit. Here, we revisit these with
more integrated manner. In addition, we also briefly discuss different types
of the measured response: magnetic field and EMF.

Inductive Limit
---------------

This limit indicates the stage of induction process where all secondary
currents are concentrated at the surface of the isolated body to oppose the
change in the normal component of the primary field. At this instant current
has not penetrated into the conductor and the inductive limit is dependent
only on the geometry of the target. We work through this limit in both
frequency and time domain.

Response function in frequency domain can be written as

.. math::
    Q(\omega) = \frac{\imath \omega \tau}{1+\omega\tau}

Inductive limit is when :math:`\omega` goes to :math:`\infty`:

.. math::
    \lim_{\omega \rightarrow 0 } Q = 1

Then the measured EM response will be

.. math::
    \frac{H^s}{H^p}=CQ = C,

where :math:`C` is the coupling coefficient (only dependent on geometry of the
loops). For transient response this will correspond to time at zero because
the response function with step-on current, :math:`q_{on}(t)` will be

.. math::
    \lim_{t \rightarrow 0 } q_{on}(t) = \lim_{t \rightarrow 0 }  e^{-t/\tau} = 1, \ t>0

This will be directly connected to the secondary magnetic field with the step-
on current, :math:`h^s_{on}(t)`:

.. math::
    h^s_{on}(t) = CH^p q_{on} (t)

and the early time limit will be

.. math::
    \lim_{t \rightarrow 0 } h^s_{on}(t) = CH^p

Therefore, with the step current excitation for the secondary magnetic field
inductive limit can be reached at the early time limit.

.. note::
    This is not true for the secondary EMF, :math:`\mathcal{E}^s`.

Resistive Limit
---------------

At this limit the induced currents have penetrated the body fully, and
conductivity information can be extracted as well as geometry.

The restive limit is defined in the frequency domain as the slope of the
response function as frequency approaches to zero:

.. math::
    \lim_{\omega \rightarrow 0} \frac{1}{\imath}\frac{\partial Q(\omega)}{\partial \omega} = \tau,

which has the exact time-domain equivalent

.. math::
    \int_{0}^{\infty}q_{on}(t) = \tau

Effectively, harmonic and transient response at the resistive limit can be written as

.. math::
    \text{Resistive limit:}\ \frac{H^s}{H^p} = \imath \omega \tau C

.. math::
    h^s_{on} = C H^p \tau


Magnetic field vs. EMF
----------------------

When illustrating Inductive and Resistive limits, we use magnetic field as our
response because the secondary magnetic field was compatible to define both
limits in time domain. However, often we measure EMF at the Rx loop hence, we
need to clarify their relationship.

Faraday's law in integral form can be written as

.. math::
    \mathcal{E}(t) = \int_{S} -\mu_0 \frac{\partial \mathbf{h}}{\partial t} \cdot d \mathbf{S}

Since integration is spatial operation, time behavior of the EMF will be same
as the time derivative of magnetic field with the negative sign.

A key feature of transient response is absence of the primary field when
:math:`t>0`. This is only true for the magnetic field when step-off current is
used. However, for the EMF it is true for both currents.

.. note::

    EMF can loosely be considered as time derivative of the magnetic field
    with the negative sign.
