.. _emc_data:

Data
====

The Z-axis tipper electromagnetic technique (ZTEM) is a natural source
geophysical method. It is similar to the magnetotelluric method (MT) but only
the magnetic fields are measured :cite:`lo08`. The vertical component of the
magnetic field is recorded along flight lines while the horizontal field
components are measured at a fixed reference station on the surface. Transfer
functions relate the vertical components to the horizontal component as shown
in Equation :eq:`emceq1`:

.. math:: \mathbf{H}_z (\mathbf{r}) = T_{zx} (\mathbf{r},\mathbf{r}_0) \mathbf{H}_x(\mathbf{r}) +  T_{zy} (\mathbf{r},\mathbf{r}_0) \mathbf{H}_y(\mathbf{r})
    :label: emceq1


.. figure:: ./images/fig12.png
    :name: emc12
    :figwidth: 35%
    :align: left

    Plan view map showing a conductive block in a halfspace.

.. figure:: ./images/fig13.png
    :name: emc13
    :figwidth: 50%
    :align: left

    ZTEM tipper data for 3 select frequencies over the conductive block shown in :numref:`emc12`.


Each tipper has an in-phase and a quadrature component. To get a feel for this
type of data, we first look at a synthetic example. The true model consists of
a conductive block in a halfspace, as shown in :numref:`emc12`. Tipper data
are :ref:`simulated <forward_modelling>` in 3D and the in-phase and quadrature
components are plotted for select frequencies (:numref:`emc13`).

A few key things can be seen in the data. First, the anomaly over a block has
a high peak and a low peak. Additionally, the orientation of the anomaly
changes when we look at the :math:`T_{zx}` tipper versus the :math:`T_{zy}`
tipper. Looking a bit closer and assuming a standard right-hand coordinate
system, we can deduce that the ZTEM data are negative when going from a
resistive region to a conductive region. Alternatively, the data are positive
when traveling from a conductive to a resistive region. Outside of the
anomaly, the data are zero. Because the tipper data are based on a ratio of
the horizontal magnetic fields and the vertical magnetic field, ZTEM data are
insensitive to uniform backgrounds as well as 1D layered earths. Thus, the
data only show anomalies for 3D conductivity variations, such as this block in
a halfspace.

Secondary observations include how the data change as frequency changes. For
the in-phase (real) data, the amplitude increases with frequency. Recall that
higher frequencies have a lower skin depth than lower frequencies, and are
thus more sensitive to near-surface regions. The imaginary or quadrature data
show the same anomaly orientations for the two tippers but the amplitudes are
lower in general and in this case, the middle frequency plotted in
:numref:`emc13` has the highest amplitudes.

This simple example showcases what ZTEM data look like and exemplifies that
interpretation directly from the data is not always straightforward. But, with
these patterns in mind, we can now look at the field data over Elevenmile
Canyon and get first-hand ideas about the conductivity structures at depth.



The data over Elevenmile Canyon were collected by Geotech Ltd. in 2011 using a
helicopter-based ZTEM and aeromagnetic system. The survey consisted of 200
line kilometers with 200 m spacing over a 38 square km area about 45 km east
of Fallon, Nevada. There are approximately 20,000 data locations. The flight
lines are shown in :numref:`emc2`. The in-phase and quadrature components of
the tipper transfer functions are calculated from raw field data for siz
frequencies ranging from 20 to 720 Hz. Preliminary processing such spike
removal, attitude corrections, and filtering were applied to the data by
Geotech.

Data were collected for six frequencies: 30, 45, 90, 180, 360, and 720 Hz.
When comparing data maps between frequencies, the images are similar but
smaller details change. :numref:`emc3` shoes the in-phase (real) and
quadrature (imaginary) components of :math:`T_{zx}` and :math:`T_{zy}` for hte
30 Hz frequency in a local grid.

.. figure:: ./images/FIGURE_3.png
    :name: emc3
    :figwidth: 100%
    :align: left

    The four components of the lowest (30 Hz) frequency data are shown in
    (a)-(d).

First-hand ideas about the conductivity structures can be obtained by
evaluating the data. ZTEM data over a conductive block will show a high and
low anomaly while data over a halfspace or a layered earth will be zero.
Therefore, we can expect little to no 3D conductivity structures in the
eastern portion of the survey area as the tipper data is roughly zero to the
east of 6000 m. In the western portion of the area, the real and imaginary
component of :math:`T_{zx}` show a north-west trending anomaly while in the
:math:`T_{zy}` components show anomalies of different shapes in the area. This
shows the difference between the two tippers and the different magnetic field
components they take use.

Despite getting a few initial ideas from the data, the data remain hard to
interpret. The next page delves into :ref:`processing and inverting
<emc_processing>` the data to better understand the conductivity.
