.. _bookpurnong_properties:

Properties
==========

The sandy topsoil at Bookpurnong is mostly saturated by water from the river,
irrigation, and other source of recharge. The ground conductivity is therefore
dominated by the salinity of groundwater. High salinity in water means more
ions acting as free charge carriers, so high electrical conductivity is
expected at the place suffering from high salinization (see more information
under :ref:`Physical Properties: Electrical
Conductivity <electrical_conductivity_index>`). At Bookpurnong, the fresh
water is from the river and irrigation, and the saline water is from the
natural acquifer under the highland. Therefore, the conductivity can be a
direct indicator of the source of groundwater, from the river or the
intrusion.

For the purpose of studying the effect of SIS, hydrogeologists have sampled
and measured the electrical conductivity of the groundwater along several
transects across the river floodplain. The
measured conductivity from several wells along Transect 3 is plotted as cross
sections from the river bed to the bank both before and after SIS.

.. (Figure :numref:`booky-salinity`).


.. figure:: ./images/booky-drills.jpg
 :align: left
 :width: 80%
 :name: booky-drills

Locations of the drills where groundwater samples were taken for the salinity analysis.

.. figure:: ./images/booky-salinity.jpg
 :align: left
 :width: 80%
 :name: booky-salinity

Groundwater salinity measured by electric conductivity.

Those field physical property measurements confirmed that the water
conductivity at Bookpurnong is at the order of 1 S/m. The actual conductivity
of the ground may be lower if taking into account the porosity, but it is
still much higher than the usual earth media. Also, the overall conductivity
is higher towards the bank than in the flush zone; and higher near the surface
than at depth. Please remember those information, as we will need this type of
geological information to validate our interpretation models in Synthesis.

.. todo:: add ref to the bib

Reference:

- K.L. Holland, I.D. Jolly, K.L. McEwan1, T.M. Doody, M. White, V. Berens, N. Souter, 2008, The ‘Bookpurnong Experiment’: will groundwater management and flooding improve the health of the floodplain vegetation? 2nd International Salinity Forum: Salinity, Water and Society – Global issues, local action. Adelaide, Australia.

