.. _bookpurnong_processing:

Processing
==========

In this step, we process the field data for the preparation of interpretation.
Many different processing methods exist for airborne EM, but the-state-of-art
is quantiative inversion that converts the measurements of EM fields to a
conductivity model. In hydrological studies where the strata are almost
horizontal, 1D layered earth modeling is usually the standard practice. In the
following, we describe our processing in two steps: (1) data quality control
and (2) 1D inversion.

Quality control of frequency domain data
----------------------------------------

Although the contractors have preliminarily processed the raw data to suppress
the noise, there is still unwanted interference in the deliverables that can
potentially harm the inversion. So our quality control precedure is supposed
to prepare the data for inversion.

.. figure:: ./images/booky-resolveqc.jpg
    :align: left
    :width: 80%
    :name: booky-resolveqc

    Quality control of the FDEM data.

Viewing the plot of data for each frequqncy :numref:`booky-resolveqc`, we
identify some unrealistically small outlies, and we decide to remove them from
the data set. The uncertainty assigned to this data set is 5% plus 10 ppm as a
floor.


Quality control of time domain data
-----------------------------------

For quality control, the SkyTEM data are also viewed for individual time
channels along the flight lines :numref:`booky-skytemqc`. There are noticeable
irregular data called "channel jumping", and noise that contaminates the late
time channels. The unrealistic decays and outlies can be automatically
detected by the analysis of first or second derivative, and be removed. The
noise present in the late times provides an estimate of a noise floor. The
assigned uncertainty to the data is 10% plus 1E-13.

.. figure:: ./images/booky-skytemqc.jpg
    :align: left
    :width: 80%
    :name: booky-skytemqc

    Quality control of the TDEM data.



1D layered earth inversion
==========================

The two data sets in this case history have been previously inverted using
spatially constrained inversion by :cite:`viezzoli2009`. Here we present the
inversion results obtained using UBC-GIF programs.

Layered model
-------------

A layered model treats the earth below the surface as a stack of horizontally
infinite layers, each of which has a constant conductivity value. In our
precedure, every sounding is given a layered model, and the conductivity
values of the layers are sought by the inversion with the observed data at
that sounding. The output of each sounding inversion is a series of
conductivity values as a function of depth. Finally, all the 1D functions of
conductivity at different locations are stitched together to form a 3D volume.

For consistency, both the FDEM and TDEM inversion share the same layer
thicknesses. Because the smallest skin depth or diffusion distance is about a
couple of meters, we design the top layer to be 1 m thick. The thickness
increases geometrically from the surface to the depth of 225 m. There are 21
layers in total.

Inversion result
----------------

Inversions of the TDEM and FDEM data sets are carried out on a sounding-by-
sounding basis. Most soundings achieve the desired misfit except that some
soundings fail to converge due to excessive noise or coherent bias in the
data. :numref:`booky-models` shows the depth slices of the stitched volume of
conductivity from the FDEM and TDEM inversions. Although the data maps of the
two data sets are in different units and have different apparence, the
reconstructed conductivity models are highly consistent. This demonstrates the
necessity of inversion-based processing and interpretation.

.. figure:: ./images/booky-models.png
    :align: left
    :width: 100%
    :name: booky-models

    Inversion models of the TDEM and FDEM data sets at Bookpurnong. The shaded
    area indicates the highland where irrigation takes place.

