.. _aspen_properties:

Properties
==========

Using resistivity logs, an initial, simple resistivity model was constructed
using publicly-available data from eight wells, shown in :numref:`asp2`
:cite:`DevrieseOldenburg2016`. Averaged values from the logs are assigned to
each geologic formation.

.. figure:: ./images/fig2.png
    :align: right
    :figwidth: 45%
    :name: asp2

    Resistivity logging data from 8 wells at the Aspen property are used
    to create a simple 1D resistivity model.

:numref:`asp2` shows that the different geologic formations can be
distinguished using the resistivity data. Thus, EM data can be sensitive to
these different units. Of particular interest is extracting information about
the Clearwater Formation, such as its depth, thickness, and integrity. The
Clearwater is essential for SAGD operations as it acts as a cap rock for the
steam. The resistivity of the McMurray Formation can also provide information
about the quality of the heavy oil, where a higher resistivity may indicate
higher bitumen content compared to lower resistivities :cite:`Cristall2004`. A
third region of interest to EM studies is the unconformity between the
McMurray and Devonian units. Water samples within the Athabasca oil sands
range in salinity due to salt dissolution, suggesting there are pathways
between the aquifers in the Devonian and the McMurray Formation
:cite:`Cowie2015`. This can significantly lower the resistivity of the McMurray
Formation, leading to incorrect interpretations of the bitumen content.
Finally, resistivity variations in the Quaternary can provide information
about channels and incisions, especially when well data may not be available
near the surface :cite:`Imperial2013`.

The :ref:`next page <aspen_survey>` describes the survey that was collected to
address these geologic questions. However, remember the geologic and
resistivity background provided here as this type of information will be used
to validate our interpretation models in :ref:`Synthesis <aspen_synthesis>`.


