.. _aspen_synthesis:

Synthesis
=========

.. figure:: ./images/FormationMM.png
    :align: right
    :figwidth: 70%
    :name: asp11

    Comparison between the top of the McMurray from (a) borehole core
    logging and (b) the recovered model from inversion. Panel (a) is
    courtesy of Imperial Oil :cite:`Imperial2013`.

Isosurfaces for the tops of the Grand Rapids, Clearwater, and McMurray
Formation were calculated by choosing transitional resistivity values. These
boundaries are shown in :numref:`asp10`. While it was originally thought that
only minimal information could be extracted about the McMurray Formation from
the EM data, the calculated isosurface shows very similar structures and
characteristics to the structure map by :cite:`Imperial2013`, as shown in
:numref:`asp11`. In addition, the elevations recovered from the model for the
McMurray Formation are very comparable to those from borehole core logging.
This suggests that airborne EM can be a great exploration and first-hand
interpretation tool for oil sands deposits in Alberta. The recovered model
also shows that the McMurray Formation is more resistive than the other layers
but it is unlikely that the airborne EM system has enough sensitivity to
detect the bottom of the formation, the unconformity at the Devonian
limestone, and any salts or salt dissolution that may be present. In addition,
without more information, it would be difficult to interpret the thickness of
the Wabiskaw Member, which is expected to be a 5 m transitional layer between
the Clearwater and McMurray Formations.

The recovered layers and resistivity values in the interpolated 3D model are
similar to those from an airborne time-domain survey using the AeroTEM system
over a Husky property, directly north of the Aspen property (:numref:`asp1`)
:cite:`ZhdanovEtAl2013`. This indicates that by using the VTEM system and the
pseudo-3D inversion method, similar information can be extracted.
