.. _magnetic_permeability_magnetism:


Magnetism in Rocks
==================

The magnetic permeability of a rock is determined by the nature of induced
magnetization it experiences in response to an applied magnetic field. Here,
we define induced magnetization by considering a collection of magnetic dipole
moments. A mathematical relationship between induced magnetization and the
magnetic permeability is then presented.

Theory of Magnetism
-------------------

Magnetism is attributed to the movement of electrical charges. Within a
material, the motion and spin of individual electrons is responsible for
generating a collection of magnetic moments :math:`\{{\bf m_i}\}`. The total
magnetic moment for the material :math:`{\bf m}`, is equal to the vector sum
of all electron magnetic moments:

.. math::
    {\bf m} = \sum_i {\bf m_i}
    :label: Sum_Dipoles

Magnetization :math:`{\bf M}` is defined as the magnetic moment per unit volume:

.. math::
    {\bf M} = \frac{d {\bf m}}{d V}
    :label: Mag_Definition

The majority of rocks are paramagnetic. In the absence of a magnetic field,
magnetic moments within paramagnetic rocks are frequently disordered. In this
case, individual magnetic moments cancel out one another, resulting in a net
magnetization of zero. When exposed to a magnetic field, the magnetic moments
within paramagnetic rocks experience a torque. This torque attempts to align
individual magnetic moments along the direction of the field. As a result, the
rock experiences a net magnetization parallel to the applied field. This
process is illustrated in :numref:`figDipoleAlign`.

.. figure:: images/figMagDipoles.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 70%
    :name: figDipoleAlign

    Magnetization :math:`{\bf M}` in matter, as represented by the partial
    alignment of magnetic dipole moments :math:`{\bf m_i}` in response to an
    applied magnetic field :math:`{\bf H}`.

Magnetic susceptibility is defined as the ratio between induced magnetization
and the strength of an applied magnetic field. Provided the magnetic field is
not too strong, this relationship is linear (:cite:`griffiths1999`):

.. math::
    {\bf M} = \chi {\bf H}
    :label: Const_Rel_Mag

where :math:`\chi` is magnetic susceptibility of the rock, :math:`{\bf H}` is
the magnetic field intensity, and :math:`{\bf M}` is the induced
magnetization. Because the majority of rocks are paramagnetic, they are almost
always characterized by magnetic susceptibilities greater than 0. However,
some rocks are diamagnetic, an experience induced magnetizations which opposed
the applied magnetic field. These rocks are characterized by magnetic
susceptibilities less than 0.

Relationship Between Magnetization and Magnetic Permeability
------------------------------------------------------------

According to the :ref:`magnetic constitutive relationship<magnetic_permeability_index>`, the relationship
between magnetic susceptibility and magnetic permeability is given by (:cite:`griffiths1999`):

.. math::
    {\bf B} = \mu {\bf H} = \mu_0 \big [1 +\chi \, ] {\bf H} = \mu_0 \big [ {\bf H + M} \big ]
    :label: Rel_BMH

where :math:`\mu_0 = 4\pi \times 10^{-7}` H/m is the permeability of free-
space. Eq. :eq:`Rel_BMH` implies that induced magnetization contributes
towards the net magnetic flux density within the rock. Furthermore, the nature
of this contribution may be represented by the rock's magnetic permeability.












