.. _emc_setp:

Setup
=====

.. figure:: ./images/FIGURE_1.png
    :name: emc1
    :figwidth: 50%
    :align: right

    Figure from :cite:`skord11` showing temperature measurements between the
    Dixie and Fairview Valleys. The location of the Elevenmile Canyon survey
    area is outlined in black and lies just north of the Fairview Valley
    Northwest anomaly.

.. figure:: ./images/FIGURE_2.png
    :name: emc2
    :figwidth: 50%
    :align: right

    Cropped geology map (:cite:`hess97`) with the flight lines of the ZTEM
    survey. The survey consists of 20 lines, separated by 200 m. Each line is
    approximately 11 km long. Geologic units mapped at the surface are Qoa
    (surface alluvium), Kg (granites), Tys (non-marine sedimentary rocks), TRs
    (limestone), Tor (rhyolitic welded tuff), and Tv (volcanic rocks)
    :cite:`page65`. The pins show the locations of wells and a DC resistivity
    survey.

The Elevenmile Canyon, located in the Basin and Range of western Nevada 45 km
east of Fallon, Nevada, contains a low geothermal anomaly
:cite:`mankhemthong08`. The canyon lies on the eastern flank of the Stillwater
Range and extends into the basin between the Dixie and Fairview Valleys. Both
these valleys are associated with geothermal activity and particularly the
Dixie Valley has been extensively studied (e.g.,
:cite:`blackwell99,blackwell00,blackwell07,wannamaker07,penfield10`.

The Fairview Peak and Dixie Valley fault zones ruptured in 1954
:cite:`mankhemthong08`. The orientations of the faults and the regional
structural setting have created a transition zone between the two valleys,
bounded by the Louderback Mountains to the east and the Stillwater Range to
the west. The Elevenmile Canyon anomaly occurs at the end of the main Dixie
Valley fault while the Fairview Valley fault steps eastward on the opposing
side of the valley.

A shallow, two-meter temperature survey, where temperature is measured at 1 m,
1.5 m, and 2 m depths, shows a 1.5-2.5 :math:`^{\circ}` C anomaly south of the
area of interest and a 3-4 :math:`^{\circ}` C anomaly at close-by Pirouette
Mountain :cite:`skord11`. :numref:`emc1` shows the temperature readings and
the location of the Elevenmile Canyon survey area. Additionally, a thermal
anomaly was confirmed at the survey area :cite:`lazaro11`. A LiDAR study in
the same general area mapped four fault zones and concluded that the
geothermal temperature anomalies are associated with these complex fault
structures :cite:`helton11`. :numref:`emc2` shows a geologic map of the area
:cite:`hess97`. Faults are mapped in the aluvium near the boundary between the
Stillwater Range and the basin. All of the mapped faults trend north-south, as
do those in the Dixie Valley.

