.. _furggwanghorn_dataprocessing:

Data and Processing
===================

Surface-Based GPR Surveys
-------------------------

The processing sequence applied to the surface-based GPR data is relatively
standard (:ref:`Table 4<GPRprocessingG>`). An example of applying this
sequence to profile G2 is presented in :numref:`Ground_dataprocA`. Although
the G2 image is relatively noisy with numerous artifacts, some clear dipping
events are seen between 500 and 1100 ns. Do these represent subsurface
reflections? Unfortunately, comparable events are not observed on the G1 and
G3 images, long portions of which are practically coincident with or only a
few meters from the G2 image (compare images in :numref:`Ground_dataprocB`).

The 25 MHz image in :numref:`Ground_dataprocB` c helps explain the
inconsistencies between coincident and adjacent GPR sections. We interpret the
mostly curvilinear events in the top 500 ns of :numref:`Ground_dataprocB` d as
in plane and out of plane diffractions generated at the boundaries between the
snow cover and rugged bouldery surface and at buried boulders. Recording 25
MHz GPR data along a second profile offset by only a few meters would result
in comparably complex diffraction patterns, but it would be nearly impossible
to correlate events on the two profiles. Accordingly, we conclude that the
primary explanation for inconsistent surface-based GPR images is the
overwhelming effects of in plane and out of plane diffractions.

.. _GPRprocessingG:

**Table 4:** Processing scheme applied to the surface-based GPR data collected across the Furggwanghorn rock glacier.

.. csv-table::
    :header:  "Step","Details"

    "| Coordinate assignment to traces", "Coordinates from differential GPS"
    "| Time-zero corrections", "Manual pick of direct wave"
    "| Removal of high amplitude first arrivals",  ""
    "| Automatic gain control", "100 ns"
    "| Moving singular value decomposition filter
    | (only applied to pulseEKKO data)", "20-trace window largest 2% eigenvalues set to 0"
    "| Bandpass filter", "10 - 110 MHz (50MHz); 3 - 60 MHz (25MHz)"
    "| Binning", "Bin size 0.5-0.8m depending on original trace spacing"
    "| Moving average filter", "Weighted average of 3 traces"
    "| Trace equalisation", "Equalisation of the mean amplitudes"
    "| Kirchhoff time migration", "Constant velocity 0.13 m/ns"
    "| Elevation corrections", "Simple elevation static corrections"
    "| Time-depth conversion", "Same velocity model as for the migration "

.. figure:: images/Ground_dataprocA.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: Ground_dataprocA

    Example of the processing sequence in Table 4 applied to surface-based GPR
    profile G2. (a) Raw data after time zero correction and automatic gain
    control. (b) As for (a) after application of a singular value
    decomposition filter and bandpass filter. (c) As for (b) after trace
    binning, application of a moving average filter and trace equalization. V
    : H ≈ 1 : 2.


.. figure:: images/Ground_dataprocB.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: Ground_dataprocB

    Comparison of nonmigrated sections acquired at the same general location
    along similarly oriented profiles (see caption to
    :numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey` for locations) using the different
    surface-based GPR systems shown in :numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey` a ‑
    c: (a) 50 MHz Mala Rough Terrain Antennae, (b) 50 MHz pulseEKKO PRO (same
    section as shown in :numref:`Ground_dataprocA` c, but with different
    vertical and horizontal scaling for better comparison with the other
    sections), (c) 25 MHz pulseEKKO PRO. V : H ≈ 1 : 1.


H-GPR Surveys
-------------

Strong horizontal noise dominated the raw H-GPR data (:numref:`Heli_dataprocA`
a). Fortunately, this noise, which was generated by the helicopter, was
sufficiently coherent and predictable that it could be eliminated and the
geological signal enhanced by applying carefully designed singular value
decomposition filters, appropriate gain functions and F-X deconvolution
(:ref:`Table 5<GPRprocessingH>`; :numref:`Heli_dataprocA` b). The processed
data were Kirchhoff time migrated (:numref:`Heli_dataprocA` c) and converted
to depth using a simple ground velocity model. Unlike the surface-based GPR
examples, the H-GPR images are consistent from line to line and from year to
year (:numref:`Heli_dataprocB` and :numref:`Heli_dataprocC`).
:cite:`merz2016` argue that the superiority of the H-GPR images relative to
the ground-based ones is not related to the different GPR instruments that
were employed. Instead, they suggest that the H-GPR images are affected by
much weaker near surface diffractions and that there is only insignificant
coupling between the H-GPR antennae and the snow and near surface
heterogeneities.


.. _GPRprocessingH:

**Table 5:** Processing scheme applied to the H-GPR data collected across the Furggwanghorn rock glacier.

.. csv-table::
    :header:  "Step","Details"

    "Coordinate assignment to traces", "| Coordinates from differential GPS"
    "Moving singular value decomposition filter", "|  100-trace window, largest 2% eigenvalues set to 0"
    "Inverse average envelope gain", "| Envelope derived from the reflection strength"
    "F-X deconvolution", "| 40 - 180 MHz, horizontal window length 50 traces,
    | time window length 100ns, overlap 50 ns"
    "Trace equalisation", "| Equalisation of the mean amplitudes"
    "Kirchhoff time migration", "| Constant velocities of 0.13 and 0.30 m/ns
    | for the ground and air, respectively"
    "Elevation corrections", "| Elevations based on a digital elevation model"
    "Time-depth conversion", "| Same velocity model as for the migration "

.. figure:: images/Heli_dataprocA.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: Heli_dataprocA

    Example of the processing sequence in :ref:`Table 5<GPRprocessingH>`
    applied to H-GPR data recorded along profile H5 in
    :numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey`. (a) Raw data after removal of system
    gain. (b) As for (a) after application of a singular value decomposition
    filter and gain function, F-X deconvolution and trace equalisation. (c) As
    for (b) after Kirchhoff time migration. An air layer has been removed
    (i.e. reflections from the surface appear at time equals zero). V : H ≈
    2.8 : 1.0.


.. figure:: images/Heli_dataprocB.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: Heli_dataprocB

    Comparison of nearly coincident (a) H1 and (b) H5 nonmigrated H-GPR
    sections, which were recorded in Winter / Spring 2012 and Winter / Spring
    2013, respectively (see :numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey` for locations).
    Letters a ‑ i identify distinct features and patterns observed in both
    sections. An air layer has been removed (i.e. reflections from the surface
    appear at zero time). V : H ≈ 2.8 : 1.0.


.. figure:: images/Heli_dataprocC.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: Heli_dataprocC

    Comparison between nearly parallel (a) H3 and (b) H4 nonmigrated H-GPR
    sections, both of which were recorded in Winter / Spring 2013 (see
    :numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey` for locations). Letters j - q identify
    distinct features and patterns observed in both sections. An air layer has
    been removed (i.e. reflections from the surface appear at zero time). V :
    H ≈ 3.5 : 1.0.
