.. _furggwanghorn_interpretation:

Interpretation
==============

The general consistency of the H-GPR sections and some of the large scale
features of the Furggwanghorn rock glacier and adjacent and underlying
geological units are best viewed by progressively moving through the 3D volume
of images in the following animation.

.. _3DGPRvolume:

.. raw:: html

    <div style="margin: 0px auto; text-align: center;"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NFAUUG78HJY?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

Animation 1. 3D representation of the H-GPR images.

Structural Details
------------------

To interpret the subsurface structure of the Furggwanghorn rock glacier
required iterative analyses of each H‑GPR image constrained by surface
knowledge, information contained in adjacent and crossing images and the
results of geological and geotechnical studies of seven 25 m deep boreholes
that extended along the central axis of the rock glacier
(:numref:`furggwanghorn_gprsurvey`). Typical examples of noninterpreted and
interpreted migrated helicopter GPR images are presented in
:numref:`gprinterpH4` and :numref:`gprinterpH5`. The H-GPR images are
characterized by the following GPR reflection facies that are consistent on
multiple neighboring and crossing H-GPR images:

- facies 1: subhorizontal layered reflections,
- facies 2: layered reflections with a predominant dip,
- facies 3: sigmoidal shaped reflections,
- facies 4: curvilinear reflections,
- facies 5: chaotically oriented reflections,
- facies 6: low reflectivity.

.. figure:: images/gprinterpH4.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: gprinterpH4

    Interpreted image for H-GPR line H4 (a). Dashed and dotted dark green
    lines: bedrock surface. Magenta line: major shear zone between the ice-
    rich highly reflective region and the ice-poor weakly reflective region.
    Light green lines: fault zone boundaries of rock glacier lobes. RGRZ: rock
    glacier root zone. L2, L3 and L4: active rock glacier lobes. IRG: inactive
    rock glacier. RRG: relict rock glacier. Thick black arrows: surface
    locations of lobe boundaries delineated by transverse ridges. V : H ≈ 1:
    1. (b) Topography. (c) Noninterpreted H-GPR image.


.. figure:: images/gprinterpH5.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: gprinterpH5

    As in Figure 12 but for H-GPR image and topography along line H5. Active
    and currently inactive fault zones in boreholes F5, F6, and F7 are defined
    by temperature anomalies and/or displacements. Red numbers: annual
    displacement at the surface / annual displacement across the major shear
    zone according to inclinometer measurements.

The various GPR facies have allowed distinct geological units to be
identified. Boundaries of these geological units are delineated by prominent
reflections, abrupt truncations of reflection packages and/or changes in GPR
facies. These boundaries represent fault zones or unconformities.

An upper high reflectivity region characterized by reflection facies 1 - 3 is
observed across most of the Furggwanghorn rock glacier. This high reflectivity
region extends from the surface to 9 ‑ 21 m depths. It is underlain by an
extensive region of reflection facies 6. The interface between the high and
low reflectivity regions (magenta lines in :numref:`gprinterpH4` and
:numref:`gprinterpH5`) is gradational at some locations and sharp at others.
Geological and geotechnical borehole information :cite:`buchli2013`
demonstrates that the high and low reflectivity regions are ice rich and ice
poor, respectively, and that the interface between the two regions is an
active major shear zone. Movements across this major shear zone have average
rates of 2.1, 3.7, and 4.0 m/yr in boreholes F5, F6, and F7
(:numref:`gprinterpH5`). No significant movements have been detected beneath
the major shear zone.

Four geological units, each dominated by a single GPR reflection facies, are
observed within the upper high reflectivity region (:numref:`gprinterpH4` and
:numref:`gprinterpH5`). From their 3D reflection character, we interpret the
boundaries of these geological units as fault zones. The geological units
correspond at the surface to the four topographically defined rock glacier
lobes L1 ‑ L4 in :numref:`furggwanghorn_geo`. The interpreted fault zones
appear to merge downwards with the major shear zone in a listric fashion and
project upwards to the topographic ridges that define the borders of the
lobes. Small temperature anomalies are observed at one of the listric fault
zones in two boreholes (:numref:`gprinterpH5`). Marked increases in
reflectivity below the low reflectivity region are interpreted as the bedrock
(:numref:`gprinterpH4` and :numref:`gprinterpH5`) based on the intersection of
bedrock in borehole F1 and the high reflectivity of bedrock outcrops and
shallow bedrock occurrences that are crossed by the H-GPR lines. Reflection
facies 1 - 6 are observed at various locations within the bedrock.

3D Geometry of the Bedrock Surface, major Shear Zone and Rock Glacier Lobes
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

:numref:`gprinterpshear` shows perspective views of the bedrock surface, major shear zone (décollement)
and four rock glacier lobes as determined from the H-GPR images. The
Furggwanghorn rock glacier is located within a pronounced bedrock trough that
reaches a ~48 m depth (:numref:`gprinterpshear` a). Rock glacier lobe L4
overlies parts of the other lobes in the H-GPR images, suggesting it is the
youngest. Similarly, L3 is likely younger than L2. Because L4 is the only lobe
to overlap with L1, the age of L1 relative to L2 and L3 is not established.
Nevertheless, except for the timing of the major shear zone, the sequence of
images presented in :numref:`gprinterpshear` and the following animation are
plausible representations of the rock glacier's evolution.


.. figure:: images/gprinterpshear.png
    :align: center
    :figwidth: 100%
    :name: gprinterpshear

    3D Furggwanghorn rock glacier model. Bedrock is overlain by the major
    shear zone (décollement) and lobes L1–L4.


.. _3Drockglacier:

.. raw:: html

    <div style="margin: 0px auto; text-align: center;"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GU2n6C0iKjM?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

Animation 2. Images of bedrock, major shear zone and rock glacier lobes.
